Reducing code complexity pattern (#438)
UKHomeOffice/engineering-guidance-and-standards: docs/patterns/reducing-code-complexity.md

---
layout: pattern
order: 1
title: Reducing Code Complexity
date: 2024-07-23
tags:
  - Software design
  - Ways of working
  - Quality
---

Complex code can make code difficult to maintain and hard to understand errors. There are various tools that can analyse your code to reduce or bring code complexity to your attention as well as different techniques you can use to help to reduce code complexity.

---

> ## Solution

Reviewer: Perhaps "whether code is easily testable" (testability) could be a way to reduce code complexity. I believe that's worth adding as a part of the solution. What say?

### Measure code complexity

Measuring code complexity can spot issues early, been able to make smaller changes earlier within the Software Lifecycle as well as highlighting overarching issues such as where code hasn't been reused.

#### Using tools to measure code complexity

Using static code analysis to help you understand where your code is complex can help you reduce complexity within your code. These tools can use different techniques such as Cyclomatic Complexity or Cognitive Complexity. Tools will usually make recommendations at to where you need to make changes (for instance, reusing a function or reducing the lines within a function).

Some examples might be SonarQube or Code Climate.

#### Using pre-commit hooks

Using a git pre-commit hook can also encourage developers to make changes to their code before it gets committed to your repository. Tools such as ESLint for JS can help with this.

### Reducing code complexity

There are different techniques you can follow to reduce complexity, which should in turn make your code more readable, easier to understand and maintain.

#### Splitting files and functions

> Keeping code a succinct, easy to manage files and functions makes it easier to maintain with simpler functions and allows for further reuse.

Author: ```suggestion
Keeping code succinct, easy to manage files and functions makes it easier to maintain with simpler functions and allows for further reuse.
```

Designing functions to be modular from the outset can also help reduce complexity, as well as enable reuse in the future.

#### Naming conventions

Setting good functions and variable names helps other developers understand what a function or variable represents.

In function names it can also help reduce complexity by describing 'what' the function does, not 'how' it does it.

> #### Regularily refactoring code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Regularly refactoring code
```

Using refactoring can help reduce complexity, by splitting functions, reusing components etc.

#### Balance coupling vs DRY

DRY (Don't repeat yourself) is a software development principle that aims to reduce repetitive code by writing code once, and referencing it again later.

#### Documentation

> Documentation is important for reducing complexity and providers insights into what code does and how it works.

Reviewer 2: I think this needs to provide a bit more detail about how documentation relates to complexity
```suggestion
Documentation is important for reducing complexity and providers insights into what code does and how it works. Documentation should include the team's standards and patterns allowing future modification in a consistent style with minimal extra complexity.
```

Documentation is especially useful for new team members, enabling them to understand the previous structural and architectural decisions made.

---

## Considerations

> - Teams should have agree owns standards for code, set some rules and document them. Following this, the same standards can be used across code reviews, rules set in tools (for instance, setting a high complexity allowed, allowing high LOC's etc.).

Author: ```suggestion
- Teams should agree their own standards for code, set some rules and document them. Following this, the same standards can be used across code reviews, rules set in tools (for instance, setting a high complexity allowed, allowing high LOC's etc.).
```
